.TH RPLAYD 8 6/29/98
.SH NAME
rplayd \- rplay sound server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rplayd [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rplayd
is the sound server for the rplay audio system.  The server listens
for requests to play, pause, continue, and stop sounds using both the
RPLAY and RPTP protocols.  Normally RPLAY requests are received on
port 5555/udp and RPTP on 5556/tcp.  (Older ports 55555/udp and
55556/tcp are also supported)  Access to the server is restricted using
the
.I rplay.hosts
file.
.P
rplayd can be started during the system boot process, via inetd, or by
individual users.  root access may be required depending on audio
device permissions.
.P
In most causes rplayd will play sounds that are available on the local
disk.  However, rplayd can be sent sounds via the network and rplayd
can also contact other rplayds to share sound files.  The index of
all the local sound files is stored in
.I rplay.conf
and remote rplayds are specified in
.I rplay.servers.
Sounds received from other rplayds will be stored in a cache directory
normally located in
.I /tmp/.rplay-cache.
Cache entries are expired on an LRU basis.
.P
Many sound file formats are supported by rplayd.  These include:
.nf

    AU AIFF WAV VOC UB UL
    G.721 4-bit, G.723 3-bit, G.723 5-bit
    GSM

.fi
.P
Other formats can be played using external helper applications
which convert unknown file formats to CD quality data which
can then be played by rplayd.  See rplay.helpers(5)
.P
Several sounds can be played at once and sounds can be played at any
sample rate.  rplayd can be configured to output many different
formats using the various \-\-audio options.
.P
On some systems, namely Solaris and Linux, rplayd can read sounds
directly from CDROM using CDDA.  The special sound name
.I cdrom:
will play the entire CDROM.
.I cdrom:3-5
will play tracks 3 through 5.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-A DEVICE, \-\-audio\-device=DEVICE"
Use DEVICE for the audio device (/dev/dsp).
.TP
.I "\-B N, \-\-audio\-bits=N"
Audio device bits per sample, 8 or 16.
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-channels=N"
Number of audio channels to use, 1 == mono, 2 == stereo.
.TP
.I "\-c N, \-\-audio\-close=N"
Close /dev/dsp after N idle seconds, disabled with 0 (5).
.TP
.I "\-F N, \-\-audio_flush=N"
Flush /dev/dsp after N idle seconds, disabled with 0 (-1).
N = -1 : flush when spool is empty.
N = -2 : flush after each audio write. (not recommended)
N should be <= to the audio close timeout.
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-format=FORMAT"
Tell rplayd to write audio data using FORMAT, where FORMAT
can be ulaw, linear-8, ulinear-8, linear-16, or ulinear-16.
(linear = signed, ulinear = unsigned)
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-fragsize=N"
Audio fragment size (0).  The default size is zero which lets
the audio driver pick the "best" size.  The size specified must
be a power of 2 greater than 16.  Example:  256, 1024, 4096.
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-info=INFO, \-\-info=INFO, \-i INFO"
Specify complete audio device information with one option.
INFO is of the form: format,sample-rate,bits,channels
Examples: `ulaw,8000,8,1' and `linear-16,44100,16,2'
Also provided are:
    --audio-info-ulaw, --info-ulaw -> ulaw,8000,8,1
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-match"
Attempt to match the sample rate of the audio device with
the sample rate of the current sound when no other sounds
are playing.  If the match fails, --audio-sample-rate is used.
This option overrides --audio-bufsize.
.TP
.I "\-\-audio\-port=PORT[,PORT...]"
Output audio to the specified audio port(s).
Valid ports are `speaker', `headphone', and `lineout'.
Multiple ports can be specified using `speaker,headphone,lineout'
.TP
.I "\-r N, \-\-audio\-rate=N"
Write the audio buffer N times per second (0).
.TP
.I "\-R N, \-\-audio\-sample\-rate=N"
Sample rate of the audio device.
.TP
.I "\-\-auth"
Enable host access authentication.
.TP
.I "\-D DIR, \-\-cache\-directory=DIR"
Use DIR for rplay.cache (/tmp/.rplay-cache).
.TP
.I "\-\-cache\-remove"
Remove the cache directory and all its contents when rplayd exists.
.TP
.I "\-s N, \-\-cache\-size=N"
Maximum size in bytes of the rplay cache, disabled with 0 (8388608).
.TP
.I "\-\-cdrom0=DEVICE, \-\-cdrom1=DEVICE, \-\-cdrom2=DEVICE, \-\-cdrom3=DEVICE"
Specify the cdrom[0-3] to DEVICE mapping.  For Solaris 2.x the default
mapping is cdrom[0-3] -> /vol/dev/aliases/cdrom[0-3].
Linux uses cdrom[0-3] -> /dev/cdrom[0-3].
.TP
.I "\-C FILE, \-\-conf=FILE"
Use FILE for rplay.conf (/etc/rplay/rplay.conf).
.TP
.I "\-T N, \-\-connection\-timeout=N"
Close idle RPTP connections after N seconds, disabled with 0 (300).
.TP
.I "\-d, \-\-debug"
Enable debug mode.
.TP
.I "\-f HOST, \-\-forward=HOST"
Forward all RPLAY packets to HOST.
.TP
.I "\-\-fork"
Enable backgrounding rplayd at startup. (enabled)
.TP
.I "\-\-group=GROUP"
Run with GROUP privs. (audio)
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
Display helpful information.
.TP
.I "\-\-helpers=FILE"
Use FILE for rplay.helpers (/etc/rplay/rplay.helpers).
.TP
.I "\-H FILE, \-\-hosts=FILE"
Use FILE for rplay.hosts (/etc/rplay/rplay.hosts).
.TP
.I "\-\-inetd"
Enable inetd mode. (disabled)
.TP
.I "\-L FILE, \-\-log\-file=FILE"
Use file for rplay.log (/tmp/rplay.log).
.TP
.I "\-l N, \-\-log\-level=N"
Use logging level N where 0 <= n <= 4.
.TP
.I "\-\-memory\-cache\-size=N"
Maximum size in bytes of the memory cache, disable caching with 0 (4194304).
.TP
.I "\-\-memory\-cache\-sound\-size=N"
Maximum size in bytes of a sound that can be cached in memory.
A value of 0 means to try and cache all sounds. (2097152)
.TP
.I "\-N, \-\-no\-audio"
Disable audio, RPTP file server mode.
.TP
.I "\-\-no\-auth"
Disable host access authentication.
.TP
.I "\-n, \-\-no\-inetd"
Disable inetd mode. (disabled)
.TP
.I "\-\-no\-fork"
Disable backgrounding rplayd at startup. (enabled)
.TP
.I "\-\-options\-file=FILE"
Read rplayd options from FILE.
.TP
.I "\-\-port=PORT, \-\-rplay\-port=PORT"
Use PORT as the RPLAY/UDP port. (5555)
(--other-rplay-port may also be available)
.TP
.I "\-\-rptp\-port=PORT"
Use PORT as the RPTP/TCP port. (5556)
(--other-rptp-port may also be available)
.TP
.I "\-S FILE, \-\-servers=FILE"
Use FILE for rplay.servers (/etc/rplay/rplay.servers).
.TP
.I "\-t N, \-\-timeout=N"
Exit after N idle seconds, disabled with 0 (0).
.TP
.I "\-\-user=USER"
Run with USER privs. (nobody)
.TP
.I "\-v, \-\-version"
Print the rplay version and exit.
.SH FILES
.nf
~/.rplaydrc
/tmp/.rplay-cache
/usr/local/etc/rplay.conf
/usr/local/etc/rplay.helpers
/usr/local/etc/rplay.hosts
/usr/local/etc/rplay.servers
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR rplay.conf (5),
.IR rplay.helpers (5),
.IR rplay.hosts (5),
.IR rplay.servers (5),
.IR rplay (1),
.IR rptp (1)
