.TH RPLAY 1 6/29/98
.SH NAME
rplay \- play, pause, continue, and stop sounds
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rplay [options] [sound ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
rplay is client that communicates with rplayd to play, pause,
continue, and stop sounds using both the RPLAY and RPTP protocols.
Sound files can be played by rplayd directly if available on the local
system or sounds can be sent over the network using UDP or TCP/IP.
rplay will attempt to determine whether or not the server has the
sound before using the network.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-b BYTES, \-\-buffer\-size=BYTES"
Use of a buffer size of BYTES when playing sounds using RPTP flows.
The default is 8K.
.TP
.I "\-c, \-\-continue"
Continue sounds.
.TP
.I "\-n N, \-\-count=N"
Number of times to play the sound, default = 1.
.TP
.I "\-N N, \-\-list\-count=N"
Number of times to play all the sounds, default = 1.
.TP
.I "\-\-list\-name=NAME"
Name this list NAME.  rplayd appends sounds with the same
NAME into the same sound list -- it plays them sequentially.
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
Display helpful information.
.TP
.I "\-h HOST, \-\-host=HOST, \-\-hosts=HOST"
Specify the rplay host, default = localhost.
.TP
.I "\-i INFO, \-\-info=INFO"
Audio information for a sound file.  This option is intended
to be used when sounds are read from standard input.
INFO must be of the form:
    `format,sample-rate,bits,channels,byte-order,offset'
Examples: ulaw,8000,8,1,big-endian,0
          gsm,8000
Shorthand info is provided for Sun's audio devices using the
following options: --info-amd, --info-dbri, --info-cs4231.
There's also: --info-ulaw and --info-gsm.
.TP
.I "\-p, \-\-pause"
Pause sounds.
.TP
.I "\-\-port=PORT"
Use PORT instead of the default RPLAY/UDP or RPTP/TCP port.
.TP
.I "\-P N, \-\-priority=N"
Play sounds at priority N (0 <= N <= 255), default = 0.
.TP
.I "\-r, \-\-random"
Randomly choose one of the given sounds.
.TP
.I "\-\-reset"
Tell the server to reset itself.
.TP
.I "\-\-rplay, \-\-RPLAY"
Force the use of the RPLAY protocol.
The default protocol to be used is determined by checking whether or not
the server has local access to the specified sounds.  RPLAY is used when
sounds are accessible, otherwise RPTP and possibly flows are used.
RPLAY will also be used when sound accessibility cannot be determined.
.TP
.I "\-\-rptp, \-\-RPTP"
Force the use of the RPTP protocol.
See `--rplay' for more information about protocols.
.TP
.I "\-R N, \-\-sample\-rate=N"
Play sounds at sample rate N, default = 0.
.TP
.I "\-s, \-\-stop"
Stop sounds.
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
Print the rplay version and exit.
.TP
.I "\-v N, \-\-volume=N"
Play sounds at volume N (0 <= N <= 255), default = 127.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR rplayd (8),
.IR rptp (1)


